"...being in the virtual environment is not equivalent to not being in the physical environment."

[Gerrig, 1993] says that 'the sense of being transported to a mediated environment' is a moment-by-moment feeling, that at any given time the sense of presence is limited one environment and the sense of presence in the mediated environment cannot be mixed with the sense of presence in the unmediated environment - that presence is a Gestalt switch.

[Biocca & Kim, 1997] hypothesize that the sensation of presence is unstable & oscillates around three sense of place. From moment-to-moment the user may feel present in the physical environment (distal immediate), the virtual environment (distal mediated) of the imaginal environment (reduced attention to distal stimuli).

[Biocca & Kim, 1997] discovered the existence of two separate dimensions to physical presence, which they labelled 'arrival' & 'departure'. They interpret this as meaning that, contrary to [Gerrig, 1993], presence may not be a Gestalt switch, not a 100% here-or-there sensation. Either the user may be maintaining two separate but partial models of both the physical environment & virtual environment, so that s/he might feel present in the virtual environment, but not completely removed from the physical environment, or it may be that the user's phenomenal sense of presence oscillates between the virtual, physical and imaginal environments. Self-report measures taken at the end of the experience would likely find traces of the sensation of presence in both environments or some abiguity about stating that one's phenomenal self only felt present in one of the other environment.

=======

[Telepresence via Television, Biocca & Kim, 1997]

A self-report measure of presence yielded two factors. Using [Gerrig's (1993)] terminology for the sense of being transported to a mediated environments, we labeled the two factors “arrival,” for the feeling of being there in the virtual environment, and “departure,” for the feeling of not being there in the in physical environment. It appears that being in the virtual environment is not equivalent to not being in the physical environment.

With little doubt, Gerrig's concept of “being transported” seems equivalent to that of “being there,” a handy name for telepresence used by some human-computer interaction researchers [(e.g., Heeter, 1992, 1995; Reeves, Detenber, & Steuer, 1993)]. The rationale of “being transported” is that a reader is phenomenally transferred to a mediated environment, resulting from low accessibility to the unmediated information and high accessibility to the mediated information. The concept of telepresence describes thesame psychological phenomenon.

[(Gerrig, 1993)] also argues that the sense of being transported to a mediated environment, or telepresence, is a moment-by-moment feeling. This indicates that, at a given time, the sense of presence is limited to one environment and the sense of presence in the mediated environment, or telepresence, cannot be mixed with the sense of presence in the unmediated environment. This indivisible sense of presence does not allow such concepts as auditory presence or visual presence, though such modality-based classification is possible in the cases of attention, perception, and awareness.

We hypothesize that the sensation of presence is unstable and oscillates around three senses of place. From moment-to-moment the user may feel present in the physical environment, the virtual environment, or the imaginal environment (i.e., the space of daydreams, dreams, and hallucinations).

This is also consistent with the proposition that a user's degree of immersion into the mediated environment is determined by the balance of the unmediated information and the mediated information in terms of accessibility [(Gerrig, 1993)].

In general it is hypothesized that there is a competition between stimuli from the physical environment and the virtual environment for cognitive accessibility. The experience of telepresence is influenced by the mix of stimuli from the physical and virtual environments and by user traits and states.